# **High-throughput splicing assays identify missense and silent splice-disruptive POU1F1 variants underlying pituitary hormone deficiency**

### Peter Gergics, Cathy Smith, Hironori Bando, Alexander A. L. Jorge, Denise Rockstroh-Lippold, Sebastian A. Vishnopolska, Frederic Castinetti, Mariam Maksutova, Luciani Renata Silveira Carvalho, Julia Hoppmann, Julián Martínez Mayer, Frédérique Albarel, Debora Braslavsky, Ana Keselman, Ignacio Bergadá, Marcelo A. Martí, Alexandru Saveanu, Anne Barlier, Rami Abou Jamra, Michael H. Guo, Andrew Dauber, Marilena Nakaguma, Berenice B. Mendonca, Sajini N. Jayakody, A. Mendonça, A Bilge Ozel, Qing Fang, Qianyi Ma, Jun Z. Li, Thierry Brue, María Ines Pérez Millán, Ivo J. P. Arnhold, Roland Pfaeffle, Jacob O. Kitzman, Sally A. Camper

Pituitary hormone deficiency occurs in ~1:4,000 live births. Approximately 3% of the cases are due to mutations in the alpha isoform of POU1F1, a pituitary-specific transcriptional activator. We found four separate heterozygous missense variants in unrelated hypopituitarism patients that were predicted to affect a minor isoform, POU1F1 beta, which can act as a transcriptional repressor. These variants retain repressor activity, but they shift splicing to favor the expression of the beta isoform, resulting in dominant negative loss of function. Using a high throughput splicing reporter assay, we tested 1,070 single nucleotide variants in POU1F1. We identified 96 splice disruptive variants, including 14 synonymous variants. In separate cohorts, we found two additional synonymous variants nominated by this screen that co-segregate with hypopituitarism. This study underlines the importance of evaluating the impact of variants on splicing and provides a catalog for interpretation of variants of unknown significance in the POU1F1 gene.

The notebooks in this repo will create datasets from bam files and then recapitulate the plots and analyses from the paper.
